This is risk, this pandemic is risk. When the war was, because at least we could leave the house,
we could go out and move on rations and everything. You know, two ounces of butter for a week or
half a pound of sugar. Oh yeah. And you could see it coming when there was war. It was different.
You knew all the noise. The pandemic is just silent. It's horrible. Oh yes, yes, that's true.
It's um, oh yeah, it was um, I'm living there. But then, then at 20 I got married. Yeah. And I was
living just where I'm almost living now. I'm, now I'm in Christina Street. I was living in the next
street, Angelina Street, when I was 20. Just after I got married, I was lucky enough, well not
lucky enough. A friend of mine who had gone to school with and been real friends with, she died young.
She was my brother's age, just right, about 22, 23. She died and I had this house that she had lived in.
And I lived there, 20 years old. I lived there and then my life went on from there.
Yeah, so what about that thing about then getting married and family and stuff like that, Laura?
I only had one son. Yeah. Only had one son. And as a matter of fact, I've ended up with like,
don't know how many. So, as a matter of fact, there's a thing out. Oh, I was, it was my birthday on
on Sunday. Go on, I've got to ask you, how old were you on Sunday? I was 93.
You'd never believe it talking to you. Trust me, you'd never believe it. Well, as a matter of fact,
I know I'm a great, great, great, great grandmother. And I get annoyed because I've got
one granddaughter that is Facebook mad. Right. She can't put the phone down until it ends.
And every year they do give me a party for children, you know, and we generally go like
to a Chinese restaurant or somewhere where we all go, you know, have a big party of our
names. But I haven't done that for the last two years because I can't stand all that nonsense.
But apparently they got me because I've had some of my friends who sent me a card. I had, I took
the cards down. I had 27 cards and I still have, I still have four more since I took them down.
Yeah. Oh, well, I should imagine there's a lot of people that do know me. And of course,
I was a bingo fan. My bingo's closed down, you know, not since I was going to bingo,
you know, even this year, last year, you know, till it was locked down and whatever.
So I'm well known in a few places. And I'm the last left of my class in school. I can name every
one of my friends I went to school with. Some of them went years and years ago. The last one went
last year, a boy that lives by me, me and him. Well, we always used to laugh together
because both of our birthdays were in February. And he passed through, I should say, Christ
read, just anyway, you left. Another one went just before him, a Spanish boy that lived down in West
Close. There was only three left from my class. And now there's only me, all the boys and all the
girls are gone. There are a few a bit older than me, but it wasn't like either going to my school,
going to St. Mary's or some other or brought up in Ely, you know. I can name about two or three.
They're just a bit older, about my age. And of course, one in Ely, one in Fairwater.
I think I got friends, a friend, a great friend of mine, she's here every week. She's 88.
You wouldn't think it, you know, to fear. And, well, there's a few of us knocking on, but I
don't think there's any at the moment who can name as old as me. Oh my goodness.
My mum always used to say, you're as old as you allow yourself to be.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, I try to keep your grey matter going. My legs are letting me down at the
moment. And I'm trying all things. As a matter of fact, my ex daughter-in-law, she brought me
an exercise pedal. Right. That's what she brought on Saturday for me.
And I've already got that resistive one, you put your feet on. I've got a massage chair
and none of them seems to be doing my legs much good. But none of it's hurting your mind,
I can tell that. I still get open about it. If I've got my trolley with me, I still get open about.
But I haven't been out since I was in for the six months, you know, the first lockdown we had.
And Chris the Kid says, no, mum, be careful, blah, blah, blah. Yeah. I went out twice, I went out
twice that week. And that was the first time since this last lockdown. Oh, I know. And little do
they know we got more stamina than them. That's right. You've been making for Darwin, aren't you?
Yeah, Darwin's my uncle. Gwen was my auntie. I can picture Gwen, I can picture her husband as well.
I can see me as the relative of me. Yeah. I worked with them. Darwin worked in a colonial centre.
Yes, that's right. Yeah. Well, that's where I worked. That's why I was so well known,
because I worked there when I was 18. That was when I had my son. And that was the first job I
had after I had my son. The colonial centre, the colonial centre was really important.
And that's how I knew a lot of the men, you know, because the store-wings used to come there,
when they were brought up the shifts, they'd have a room at the colonial centre. And I used to serve
them, you know, I had the shift that I used to do breakfast, and then the shift I used to do that
evening meal. Yeah. I think, I'm not sure, I don't think Darwin, I don't think Darwin
worked in the office there when I was working there. I know he worked there when Mr Pencil,
this guy Mr Pencil, was the boss, you know, the manager of the club. And Mr Abel from Barre,
he worked there. Yeah, yeah. Did you know anything about the Abel family? Oh, yeah,
God, yeah, Barre families, we know more. I mean, you know, it's, you know. Henry and the two boys,
Henry and, oh, Freddie, yeah, Freddie Abel. Yeah, Freddie Abel, yeah. Yeah. I also knew another
family, with the two boys, always worked in the grocery shops, the cut food. Yep. You know, yeah,
Charlie and, oh, they were great boys, and they worked in the grocery shop in Louisa Street,
and then they came on, they came and they worked in a shop in Duke Street. And, oh, they were part
of the, part of the box then, two boys. I remember I went to a party down in Barre one night, me and
my husband were invited, and one of the chapters was there. Yeah. I don't know if it was Charlie or,
or, oh, I used to go to the Casa Blanca. It was a church originally. Yeah. That's what you're talking
about. Yep. In Mount St. Louis Square. Mount St. Louis Square is originally a church, and the chapter
was run by the owner, a very shy, very an Arab man. Yeah, but there was a few clubs at the time,
Silver Clark had one in, at the bottom of the dock, at the pier, that was, oh, I forget the name of it.
And there's another one, you had the North Star in James Street.
Then there's another one on the other side of James Street, because my husband
was a doorman there. Oh, there's a few clubs, oh, the Casa Blanca, yeah, we always used to get there
on the trade, you know, Saturday. Great music, great music. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, oh, it's a small
world, isn't it? It is, isn't it? I mean, that's the thing, that's the thing. Yeah, what better use
the Casa Blanca? I mean, I was speaking, I was speaking to someone not long ago who lives up the
valleys, up in Pont Neprethe, and he used to say, once a month, he used to go to Cardiff,
and he'd go to, he'd go to the Casa Blanca. Oh, yeah. Because people, it's an old white guy,
people would say to him, oh, you went down there. You know, and he said to me, he said,
I've never been more welcomed, and when I walked in after, I hadn't been there for a month,
people go, well, you've been. You know, and he said, friendly, never believe just how friendly
people were, as long as you treated them as you wanted them to treat you. That's always been my
motto, treat people as you would like to be treated yourself. And funny thing, like even when
I was young, most weekends, you get a lot from the valleys coming down, especially like on match
nights, you'd end up with the same cat where you was having, you know, you'd come from your club and
go for a supper with salmon, yams, or any of them Indian restaurants, and a lot of people from the
valleys, the men used to come down, you know, on a Saturday, a Friday, Saturday,
yeah, you'd get a lot of the valley people. Well, I think on Wednesday or certain days,
the mothers used to come shopping, you know, demand expenses and all them places.
A lot of Welsh girls, valleys, you know, duff boys and people from Cargis. Yeah.
Well, as a matter of fact, one time, it was when I was pregnant and I had a few friends
I used to go up to Mount Kinash occasionally on a Sunday because I had friends there.
And well, I think his, I think his, you know, both names was Pendlecuyber.
Pendlecuyber, yeah.
They had some friends there and a few times I went up there, Mount Kinash,
and we stayed friends for years, for years, only like, it's only about,
I don't just been alive for about 20 years, but other than that, I was in touch with them,
always send a Christmas card to Davises because one of them had a mixed race baby.
Yeah.
You know, there's a few, I think, up there, valleys there, like that, Iris Williams, a singer.
Yeah, well, that's it.
And what about you? Are you like mixed race looking?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
My family now, I got great faith and believe my grandson, he could always pass his rights, you know.
Yeah, you can't tell the difference. My kids, my grandkids.
Well, there's a few in my family now, you know, blue eyed.
Yeah.
Some of that blonde hair, they're gone dark now, but I got a few that got blue eyes.
Never believe it. Oh, Hitler must be turning in his bloody grave.
Don't make a remark, you know, a remark about someone because of their race,
because you never know who you're standing next to at the bar.
It could be their stepbrother, step sister, just because they're white, don't mean a thing.
Yeah, that's true that, isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah, there's a few people who can call it out like that, you know.
Well, I've got cousins and they are white, you know, that's on this dresser's side, you know.
And there's a lot, like my family, I said to them, there was one year yesterday,
I said, you don't know half of my family, they're white.
You know, some of them will say, you know, oh, we got cousins and it's on the day,
you know, we got cousins of the color, of the color, as they call it.
Yeah, yeah.
And yet I think they're out of view, they're a bit racist, you know, what they're like.
Yeah, well, it's, you know, we've had it, we've had it all our lives, you know, it's,
it's not like it's a shock to us.
Yeah, that's true.
Talking about, and that's a, there's a subject that I always ask people about,
because I think the bay is kind of special about this, funerals.
Oh, yeah.
Funerals like, you know, your-
Oh my god, I always say whenever I go to, you know, if it's someone I know,
I mean, I can't go to funerals like I used to, but if it's someone I know, whatever,
I always say, whether they love you or hate you in this day, you always get a good send off.
Oh, that'd be some fabulous funerals, like my husband, you know, I buried my husband,
and they carried him from, I just live like a block away from the church,
but they carried him, you know, around to the church, and all the respect you get.
And well, my godson, that's the only time I've been out, except twice I've been out since then,
two Saturdays ago, when we were outside at the church clapping, you know, at his cottage,
where the earth went up Butte Street, it stopped at the church for like about 10 minutes,
where we were all out there clapping, and he was my godson, he was 72 years old,
he got buried two weeks ago. But if he'd have been, if that had been a burial in the church,
my god, our church gets full. Oh, and they're on the stage as well as in our seated, all outside.
Oh, you've never seen funerals like it. And I can remember going to a few funerals,
little bit back with the jazz band as well. Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, that's right. Yeah,
people for the orders of the crew, the jazz band. Yeah. And some with the horses, you know,
but oh, oh, God, few rules that Tiger Bay, they're most talked about.
Oh, dear me. Yeah, I won't be there to see my
I mean, I said to my son, I don't want to go to my funeral kid.
I know. Yeah, good job. Good job. We can have a laugh about it. I think that's
me going because I've always had a sense of humor. I sit here sometimes laughing to me,
like a lot of people say, you know, I thought even when, you know, when my husband was alive,
years ago when he's younger, and because he always cleaned the the holes in the ships,
you know, he worked on the dock there. Yeah. And there was times like when he'd go to Milford Haven
for about a week and then come on the weekend and go back down. And if you say, Oh,
you know, being on your own, I can't sleep on my own. You know, when people say, Oh,
don't you get lonely? No, it don't bother me. Because I, you know, I like my own company.
Yeah. You know, I sat with you tonight. So I watched this thing. I watched this thing,
like Father Ted, you know, and then killing programs. And I sit here and I laugh in my head
off. And I think to myself, Oh, it's a good job. I can have a laugh, you know, the way things are
at the moment, you know, if you didn't laugh, you'd cry, you know. Yeah. And I've got a friend,
my friend I've had for about 50 years from London. And she was on the phone singing me
Happy Birthday on Sunday. And she's like me, we always have a laugh, you know, conversation.
And like we both say to each other, good job, we got a sense of humor. You know, that keeps us
going. I say, Oh, I say, give me our young days, coming home from school, swinging on the lamppost,
playing gobs in the gutter, playing in the park. We used to have come from another school out in
the street. And we'd have days when we'd be playing coke, you know, for each other, you know,
see who's going to win the game and whatever. Oh, our school days, oh, the kids today, oh,
they don't know what it's like to be happy. I mean, if you fell out with someone, you'd have
a fist fight and that'd be it. We'd be friends the next minute. But now they're killing each other.
Oh my God, they come home from school and have a, you know, spend the next, till about
six or seven o'clock with friends. And I've been about down our park, we'd go because we had lots
of things put on there. And, you know, if not, you'd go somewhere, you could go to the pictures,
you could go to the bug house, go to the bug house for bloody nothing for six months, go to the
dental and then other picture houses. God, we had lovely nights when we were kids.
I can remember, I can remember football matches in the street and in the park.
Yeah, and you're talking about that football match, that big cricket match. Yeah. But you could
play a game of cricket on the street, you know, I remember them hopscotch games.
Running through the square, one, two, three, whatever. Oh, we were fit though,
weren't we? Let's be fair, we were fit. Yeah. You know, you consider people like the Erskins and
Billy Boston and Clive Sullivan and Freeman and all of those. So much talent, so much talent.
Well, they're great friends and my better comes every Sunday, you know, because we're great
friends, going to bring one up together, Johnny Freeman's sister. Very sense, more or less like
a part of my family, you know. And Dana, oh, Dana's mum was one of my bestest friends I ever had.
So I come to be Dana's brother's godmother. She's a great friend. So I was hard spoken when she
came. She lived with us for a while, Dana's mother. And we were more like family, you know,
we always have been, you know. But I think that's the thing, you know, when we say, we say cousins,
and some are, but others aren't, but they might as well be. You've got families no relation to you,
they aren't nearer to you, you know, than your own family. Yeah. Like Dana's family, you know,
and a few families that, you know, I'm really close to. Yeah. And people still treat, I mean,
I don't know if you experienced this, but people still treat you with respect because you're older.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. And we're an auntie and uncle, that thing, you know. Yeah, often when we're out.
Well, my granddaughter, who both, she always buy my birthday cake and she always makes a big
fuss and gets something that she hasn't done before. Well, the Christmas cake that she
ordered, what she went to pay for, she bought this cake, she told me. The cake is half the size
this year of a television screen. Big square cake. Roughly. And to tell you the size of it.
And she said when she went to pay for it, well, she'd spoken to, because in the end,
I think it was out on Facebook. Right. Because there are a lot of people that know me and she
was to put on about why Nana is going to be 93, blah, blah. Yeah. And this person,
I've known him, he was born in a house just a few, well, his back gate, you're going to come out
his back gate, right onto my front door. Right. Just three of us said. And so I've known him since
he was born. And I haven't seen him for three years. He's grown up now and he's got children
of his own. And I was out a couple of back last year. And because often, you know, people shout,
I'm Auntie Laura. And I don't know who they are because I haven't seen them since they're teenagers.
You know? Yeah. And then this chap said to me, I come up to the test room, he said to me, I'm
Auntie Laura. He had these two children with him. And I looked at him. I said, oh, I said, I know
your face. I said, but you said I'm Rashid. Oh, I said, you know, because I haven't seen him for
years. Yeah. And me and his mum, you know, we were great friends in my neighbours, neighbours from
down the docks, you know, so I moved up here. And I was getting a taxi home, you know, because I had
my trolley with me. And he walked me around because he was going around that same street as well.
And he said, well, you're going to have to go, I said, I'm going to go get my taxi, that. So he
walked me there and he paid the taxi driver. He said, you know, he said, that's, you know,
what's my Auntie Laura does? He said, whatever. Well, then, you know, the same boy now, he must
have seen on Facebook, whatever, it was my birthday or whatever. And I don't know if he had arranged
to meet my granddaughter or what, but anyhow, when she went to college school, you know, she got the
cake. And he was there. I don't know if it was chance or whether they made some arrangements.
And he would never pay for the cake. He said, I'm paying for the cake for Auntie Laura. And he paid
for the cake. Because I said so when she was here on Sunday, Saturday was, Sunday was my birthday,
but Saturday we had a bit of a do. And I said to her on Sunday, when she's telling me, right,
I said, I said, well, I'm sitting, she said 15 pounds. Oh my God. Yeah. He said, he said, no,
he said, Auntie, Auntie Laura's cake, which he did. And, but Laura, how many kids have
women said that weren't even their kids? Yeah. Oh, you'd feed anybody, wouldn't you? You know,
funny, even today, if you know someone, you know, once a meal or whatever. But I used to have a lot
of kids in the house because I had the string out the back, you know, and so they'd all come,
you know, and I had to treat it. They used to climb. Oh yeah. All their kids, my grandkids,
too, you know, friends, they've all, that's how they remember me, you know, Auntie Laura.
But I am seeing them since they're youngsters, you know, like don't recognize them, half of them.
Yeah. Yeah. But that's how it was, wasn't it? You know, all your doors always open,
but that, oh, now you've got to make sure your door is closed.
Imagine someone sat there at the Norwegian church, that cafe where the Norwegian church is now,
not where it was, you know, and it's, and they're looking at all of those shops and restaurants and
all of that. What would you say to them? They're tourists. What would you say to them about
the docks and Butetown and the bay that you would want them to know about the people?
What would you say to them? Well, there's so much I can say now about it because, well,
sometimes I like to say that they wouldn't like what is changed much now, but
it's not the same. We do have a few, you know, of us, like Dana, they moved, like she's down
the docks, what's your, the Greenstone now, but like there are a few, I mean, where I am now,
I don't think I can name even five of the old neighbours, you know, that live around by me.
It's changed so much that, like I got, where I am, I'm right in the heart of High Street now,
High Street. But you'd find more people down the dockshelves where I, you know, was living in
Stewart Street when I was younger. There are more down there that did live in Tiger Bay, you know,
but more people down there who might be interested to speak to you or whatever. But
there's not much I can say. The only thing was we were all happy. We were all like one big,
oh, we're like a cold, you know, what's your last name? Mixing everything.
Melding pot, they used to call it. We were all like one big family.
Yeah. You know, everyone helping each other, all happy, happy days for us children.
I always remember, I'm so glad that I was brought up here. I don't think you'd be happier anywhere else.
Right. Thanks, kid. It was a pleasure speaking to you. Thank you.
Pleasure as well.
Okay. Bye now.
All the best, bye bye.
Bye.